.\" br-thermal man page
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026  Armin Felder
.\"
.\" This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.TH br\-thermal 8 "2026-04-25" "br-thermal 0.1" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
br\-thermal \- IPP printer application for Brother thermal printers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B br\-thermal
.I SUB-COMMAND
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ FILENAME ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B br\-thermal
is a PAPPL-based printer application that exposes USB-connected Brother
thermal printers as standard IPP network printers on localhost (or on the
network, if configured).
It acts as a self-contained IPP server: PAPPL handles the IPP protocol,
web admin UI, DNS-SD/mDNS announcement (via Avahi), and USB device I/O,
while
.B br\-thermal
provides the driver callbacks that convert PWG raster image data into the
Brother raster protocol and write it to the USB device.
.PP
On startup the server scans for connected USB devices and registers each
supported printer as an IPP printer.
Subsequent hotplug events are handled automatically via a udev rule that
triggers the
.B autoadd
sub-command.
.SH SUB-COMMANDS
.TP
.B server
Start the IPP server.
This is the sub-command used by the systemd service.
.TP
.BI add " PRINTER"
Add a printer queue manually.
Requires
.BR \-m ,
.BR \-v ,
and
.BR \-d .
.TP
.B autoadd
Scan all connected USB devices and automatically add any supported printer
that is not yet registered.
Requires a running server.
.TP
.B cancel
Cancel one or more print jobs.
.TP
.BI default " PRINTER"
Set the default printer.
.TP
.BI delete " PRINTER"
Delete a printer queue.
.TP
.B devices
List available devices.
.TP
.B drivers
List supported driver names.
.TP
.B jobs
List print jobs.
.TP
.BI modify " PRINTER"
Modify a printer queue.
.TP
.B options
List printer options.
.TP
.B pause
Pause printing for a printer.
.TP
.B printers
List registered printers.
.TP
.B resume
Resume printing for a printer.
.TP
.B shutdown
Shut down a running server.
.TP
.B status
Show server, printer, or job status.
.TP
.B submit
Submit a file for printing.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a
Cancel all jobs
.RB ( cancel ).
.TP
.BI \-d " PRINTER"
Specify the printer name.
.TP
.BI \-h " HOSTNAME"
Specify the server hostname or address to connect to.
.TP
.BI \-j " JOB-ID"
Specify a job ID
.RB ( cancel ).
.TP
.BI \-m " DRIVER-NAME"
Specify the driver name
.RB ( add ", " modify ).
See
.B DRIVERS
below.
.TP
.BI \-n " COPIES"
Specify the number of copies
.RB ( submit ).
.TP
.BI \-o " NAME=VALUE"
Specify a named option
.RB ( add ", " modify ", " server ", " submit ).
The
.B server
sub-command accepts the following options via
.BR \-o :
.RS
.TP
.BI log-file= PATH
Log destination.
Use
.B \-
for standard output.
.TP
.BI listen-hostname= HOSTNAME
Address the IPP server listens on.
Use
.B localhost
to restrict to loopback (default), or a hostname/IP to expose on the network.
.TP
.BI server-name= HOSTNAME
Advertised server name.
.TP
.BI log-level= LEVEL
Log verbosity.
One of
.BR fatal ", " error ", " warn ", " info ", " debug .
Default:
.BR info .
.TP
.BI spool-directory= PATH
Directory used to store job spool files.
Default:
.IR /var/lib/br-thermal .
.TP
.BI server-options= OPTIONS
Comma-separated server option flags, e.g.\&
.BR no-tls .
.RE
.TP
.BI \-t " TITLE"
Specify the job title
.RB ( submit ).
.TP
.BI \-u " URI"
Specify an
.BR ipp: " or " ipps:
printer or server URI.
.TP
.BI \-v " DEVICE-URI"
Specify a
.BR socket: " or " usb:
device URI
.RB ( add ", " modify ).
.SH DRIVERS
The following drivers are included:
.TP
.B brother_td_2000
Covers the Brother TD-2000 series:
TD-2020,
TD-2120N,
TD-2125N,
TD-2125NWB,
TD-2030A,
TD-2130N,
TD-2135N,
TD-2135NWB.
.TP
.B brother_pte550w_p750w_p710bt
Covers the Brother PT-E550W, PT-P750W, and PT-P710BT tape printers.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/default/br-thermal
Environment file read by the systemd service.
Defines
.B LISTEN_HOSTNAME
and
.BR LOG_LEVEL .
.TP
.I /var/lib/br-thermal
Default spool and state directory.
.TP
.I /tmp/br-thermal\fIUID\fR.sock
PAPPL IPC socket used for communication between sub-commands and a running
server, where
.I UID
is the numeric user ID of the server process.
.TP
.I /lib/udev/rules.d/60-br-thermal.rules
Udev rule granting the
.B _br-thermal
user USB access to supported printers and triggering
.B autoadd
on hotplug.
.TP
.I /lib/systemd/system/br-thermal.service
Systemd service unit.
.TP
.I /lib/systemd/system/br-thermal-autoadd.service
Oneshot systemd unit that runs
.B br-thermal autoadd
after the main service has started.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start the server, logging to the journal at info level:
.PP
.RS
.EX
br\-thermal server \-o log-file=\- \-o log-level=info \e
    \-o listen-hostname=localhost \-o server-name=localhost \e
    \-o spool-directory=/var/lib/br-thermal \-o server-options=no-tls
.EE
.RE
.PP
List all connected and supported devices:
.PP
.RS
.EX
br\-thermal devices
.EE
.RE
.PP
Add a TD-2120N printer manually:
.PP
.RS
.EX
br\-thermal add "TD-2120N" \-m brother_td_2000 \e
    \-v usb://Brother/TD-2120N
.EE
.RE
.PP
Submit a print job:
.PP
.RS
.EX
br\-thermal submit \-d "TD-2120N" label.pwg
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cupsd (8),
.BR pappl (1),
.PP
Project home page:
.I https://github.com/arminfelder/br-thermal-printer-app
.SH AUTHOR
Armin Felder.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \[co] 2026 Armin Felder.
.PP
.B br\-thermal
is free software, licensed under the GNU General Public License version 3 or
later.
See
.I https://www.gnu.org/licenses/
for details.
